Let's look at the different components of Helm. Helm has multiple components we'll be working
with. So let's take a look at its general structure, concepts, and the pieces we'll be working with.
So we have the Helm command line utility on our local system that we will be using to perform
Helm actions such as installing a chart, upgrading, rollback, etc. Charts are a collection of files,
and they contain all the instructions that Helm needs to know to be able to create the collection
of objects that you need in your Kubernetes cluster. By using charts, and adding the objects
according to these specific instructions in the charts, Helm in a way installs applications into
your cluster. When a chart is applied to your cluster, a release is created. A release is a
single installation of an application using a Helm chart. Within each release, you can have
multiple revisions. And each revision is like a snapshot of the application. Every time a change
is made to the application, such as an upgrade of the image or change of replicas or configuration
objects, a new revision is created. Now just like how we can find all kinds of images on Docker Hub
or Vagrant boxes on the Vagrant Cloud, if you're familiar with that, we can find Helm
charts in a public repository, we can easily download publicly available charts for various
applications. And these are readily available. And we can use them to deploy applications
on our cluster. And finally, to keep track of what it did in our cluster, such as the releases
that it installed, the charts used, revision states, and so on, Helm will need a place to save
this data. This data is known as metadata. And that is data about data. Now it wouldn't be too
useful if Helm would save this on our local computer. If another person would need to work
with our releases through Helm, they would need a copy of this data. So instead, Helm does the smart
thing and saves this metadata directly in our Kubernetes cluster as Kubernetes secrets.
This way, the data survives. And as long as the Kubernetes cluster survives, everyone from our
team can access it. So they can do Helm upgrades, or whatever it is that they want to do.
So Helm will always know about everything it did in this cluster. And we'll be able to keep track of every
action every step of the way, since it always has its metadata available. Now let's look at each of
these in a bit more detail. Charts are a collection of files. And they contain all the instructions
that Helm needs to know to be able to create the collection of objects that you need in your
Kubernetes cluster. By using these charts and adding the objects according to that specific
instructions is how as we discussed Helm installs applications into your cluster. Now I'll be using
two applications throughout this course to explain concepts. First is a simple HelloWorld
application, which is a simple Nginx based web server, and a service to expose it. And the other
would be a WordPress site, which is slightly more complex. Now the simple web server will help you
understand the concepts in the simplest form, the WordPress example will help you understand its
real life usage. For example, in this simple HelloWorld application, we have two objects,
a Deployment and a Service. And most of these you should be able to relate to what you learned in
the Kubernetes course, it's a standard Deployment object that deploys Pods of an image, and a
Service that exposes it as a NodePort Service, for instance. However, you might notice the image
name and replicas are specified in a different form. This is called templating. The values that
go here are part of another file called the values.yaml file. In a Helm chart, we'll often
be interacting with a special file. You see, most of the time, we won't need to build the charts
ourselves, we have hundreds of them already available to download in the public repository.
But what we'll almost always need to do, or want to do is configure the package that we install
through that chart. The values.yaml file is where the configurable values are stored. And most
of the time, this is the only file you'll have to modify to customize the deployment of the
application for your needs. This is like the settings file or the inputs file for the Helm
chart. The charts are way more complicated for a WordPress application with so many files and
very complex templating. And we will look more into templating and get into the details about
these charts later in this course. For now, we will stick with simple charts to understand
the basics. Now when a chart is applied to your cluster, a release is created. Now we could ask
ourselves why the need for an additional item? Why can't we just say we installed a chart to
Kubernetes in the command helm install my-site, Bitnami WordPress, we use the chart at Bitnami
WordPress, and named the release my-site. So why not just use a shorter command, like helm install
Bitnami WordPress and be done with it without specifying a release name. Well, one simple
reason why it makes more sense to have releases based on charts is that we can install multiple
releases based on the same chart. So we can launch a second WordPress website with a command such as
helm install my-second-site, Bitnami WordPress. And since there are two different releases,
they can be tracked separately and changed independently. Even though they're based on
the same chart as releases, they're two entirely different entities. Now this can be useful in a
lot of scenarios. For example, you can have a release for a WordPress website that your customers
use. And another release for a WordPress website that is only visible to your internal team of
developers. There they can experiment and add new features without breaking the main website.
And since the two releases are based on the same chart, once they get something working correctly
on the development side, they can transfer it to the main website since it should work exactly the
same way as the two websites are basically clones and built the same way. And we saw an example of
a very basic chart developed in Helm. And earlier, we saw an example of a chart to deploy a WordPress
application. And what if we want to deploy a new chart, say, for deploying Redis or Prometheus,
for instance, thousands of charts are readily available at different Helm repositories.
And across the world, there are different providers who are hosting Helm repositories, such as Apps
Code, community operators, TrueCharts, Bitnami, etc. And you don't have to go to each of these
repositories to search for charts. All of these repositories have listed their charts in a single
location known as the Helm Hub, or Artifact Hub, as it is also known now. So at artifacthub.io,
you'll find charts that you can use right away. As of this recording, there are over 6300 packages
available there. And you may search for the chart you're looking for, or browse through available
ones. And sometimes the charts are actually published by the actual developers of that
project. So you will see the official or verified publisher badges in such cases. And it's preferable
you use those when available. We'll see more about installing charts from repositories
in the upcoming videos and labs. Well, that's all for now. I'll see you in the next one.